@Section 
 @Title { Introduction }
 @Tag { introduction }
@Begin

@DP
This paper introduces gstat, a computer program for variogram modelling,
kriging interpolation and conditional or unconditional simulation of
uni- or multivariable geostatistical data (Cressie, 1991) in one, two or
three dimensions. The reason for writing gstat is that when the writing
started (1991) there were no reasonably priced computer programs that
were suitable for large geostatistical projects. Currently such programs
can be derived from the source code of software packages such as GSLIB
(Deutsch and Journel, 1992) or GeoEAS (Englund and Sparks, 1988). Compared
to these other software packages, gstat is in many respects more flexible
and offers in some respects more functionality.

@PP
For the specification of model settings, input and output, gstat uses a
command file language that is concise, flexible, easy to read and
intuitive. The command file gives a complete and readable summary of the
modelling, interpolation or simulation performed: from which files the
input was obtained, to which files the output was written, and all model
settings.

@PP
Being the crucial part of most geostatistical studies, variogram
modelling should be done interactively (Deutsch and Journel, 1992).
Gstat provides a portable interactive user interface that uses the
device-independent plotting program gnuplot for graphical display and
plotting of the sample variogram and variogram model.

@PP
To link geostatistical computation with map processing in a geographical
information system (GIS), several grid map formats are supported by
gstat (including ArcInfo, Idrisi and PCRaster), enabling a @I{tight
coupling} between geostatistical models and the GIS production
environment (Wesseling et al., 1996).

@PP
Gstat is free software, copyrighted under the GNU General Public
Licence. Gstat is written in @S ansi-c and is therefore easily compiled
on virtually every computer platform. So far, it has been ported to AIX,
HP-UX, Linux, DEC-Alpha, SunOS and MS-DOS.

@PP
This paper does not address problems such as @I which geostatistical
models or methods should be used or @I why certain geostatistical
modelling decisions are prefered. It only demonstrates the @I range of
problems that can be solved using gstat. In doing so, for a complete
understanding some familiarity with geostatistics, regression, matrix
algebra and GIS is assumed. The complete functionality of gstat is
documented in a 55-page user's manual (Pebesma, 1997).

@PP
This paper starts with a section on mathematical notation, methods, and
theory and practice of prediction, modelling and simulation. Next, it
explains @I what can be done with gstat, followed by a section on @I how
it is done with gstat, about the program design and the command file
syntax.  After that, sections follow on implementation and efficiency
aspects, and on managing geostatistical projects with gstat. Finally, a
section on technical issues is concluded by a discussion.

@End @Section
