@Section 
 @Title { Discussion }
 @Tag { discussion }
@Begin

@DP
For a geostatistics program, gstat is fairly complete. It provides
modelling, prediction and simulation under the linear models with
independent or stationary, spatially correlated residuals, and allows
the comparison of different, classical statistical or geostatistical,
models in terms of (a) residuals and residual variograms (using OLS, WLS
or GLS residuals), (b) predictions under the given model, (c)
simulations given that model (d) cross validation statistics. The
methods known as universal kriging, ``@I{irf-k}'', kriging with external
drift, kriging the trend, simple, ordinary or universal kriging (or
cokriging), collocated cokriging, standardized cokriging, indicator
kriging (or cokriging) and probability kriging, as well as
``traditional'' regression or ANOVA-based prediction can all be
expressed in terms of the linear model framework provided by gstat.

@PP
Features of gstat that are not found in the geostatistical software
packages GSLIB (Deutsch and Journel, 1992) and GeoEAS (Englund and
Sparks, 1988) are:
(i) the availability of a complete, simple and human-readable command
syntax that covers the full functionality,
(ii) support for reading and writing GIS data (map) formats, and
(iii) absence of built-in limits.
Also, gstat is not a software @I{package} because a single binary takes
care of the full functionality. Only for plotting variograms an
additional program is used, but it is called by gstat in such a way that
the user does not have to be aware of it.  Obviously, for specialized
processing of the results, like printing the output maps, other programs
(or a GIS) should be used.

@PP
In GSLIB, flexibility comes from providing the source code (Deutsch and
Journel, 1992, p. i): the code is meant as example programs that should
be customized to specific problems. This requires from users that they
are experienced Fortran programmers, or at least that they know how to
handle a compiler. In gstat, once the binary executable of the program
is available, its full potential is acquired: in contrast to GSLIB,
flexibility in gstat comes from program design and the availability of a
custom-designed command language for any problem ranging from trivial to
very complex (section 4). Such a flexibility not only allows users who
can program to concentrate on the real (geostatistical) problem instead
of having to bother about source code, compilers or data conversion, it
also allows users with no programming expertise to acces the whole
framework of functions offered. (The price to pay for this flexibility
is some run-time performance: some GSLIB programs written for special
cases, like calculation of variograms from gridded data, will outperform
gstat in those special cases.) The authors of GSLIB (Deutsch and
Journel, 1992) do acknowledge other shortcomings of GSLIB, notably the
absence of (i) dynamic memory allocation (p. 6), (ii) a portable
graphical user interface (p. 21), (iii) ``an intelligent interpretation
program that would read each parameter file and create a verbose English
language description of the job being described by the parameters'' (p.
21) and (iv) an implementation of the multiple grid concept (p. 124,
187). Gstat fills most of these gaps.

@PP
In contrast to GSLIB, GeoEAS is a software package that is completely
menu-driven and that does not provide non-interactive use. This makes it
unsuitable for larger projects (section 6): there's no way to guarantee
the prevention of input errors. This, together with the data and grid
limits of the original MS-DOS version of GeoEAS, were the initial
reasons for writing gstat. (Recently, GeoEAS has been ported to Sun and
Data General workstations, but we had no succes in compiling the source
code on other unix platforms.)

@PP
The gstat source code is easily extensible due to a clean modular setup
of the components such as "I/O" (data and grid map formats), variogram
model functions, prediction methods and the command file syntax. This
allows programmers to add new functionality that is accessible for
non-programmers through a modified gstat executable. Because the source
code is copyrighted by the first author under the GNU General Public
License, it can be freely obtained, redistributed and modified. The
meschach matrix library and the PCRaster map library used by gstat, and
the plotting program gnuplot are available under similar conditions.

@PP
By the authors knowledge there is no other (free) geostatistical program
or package that offers the same functionality on so many different
platforms. Having a single @S ansi-c source makes porting to new
platforms fairly trivial. The gnuplot program, needed for graphical
display of variograms, is actively being maintained by a large user base
on the internet, which guarantees that it will work on about any
platform currently available.

@PP
We do not doubt that for a considerable group of practitioners in the
field of geostatistics, and for a certain set of practical problems,
gstat is the best choice software with respect to time or money
investments, or with respect to the computer skills required from the
practitioners. Since it's free and easy to use, it is also very suitable
for educational purposes.
